*This project has been created as part of the 42 curriculum by lvasconc and yanlu.*

# A-Maze-ing
## Description
This project implements a maze generator in Python that takes a configuration file, generates a maze based on the given configuration, writes the maze, entry and exit points and the shortest solution to an outputfile, and also visualize the results.

All generated mazes contain a "42" pattern at the center consisting of fully closed cells, unless the maze is too small for the pattern (smaller than 7 x 5). In this case, a maze without the "42" pattern will be generated.

### Maze generation algorithms
The following algorithms are implemented to generate the maze:

#### Depth-First Search (DFS) algorithm
DFS works by

- step 1: Start with a grid where every cell is surrounded by walls.
- step 2: Pick a starting cell.
- step 3: Choose a random unvisited neighbor.
- step 4: Remove the wall between the current cell and that neighbor.
- step 5: Move to the neighbor and repeat.
- step 6: If a cell has no unvisited neighbors, backtrack to the previous cell.

Continue until all cells are visited.
#### Prim's algorithm
Prim's algorithms tries to connect unvisited cells to visited cells from all directions.
It connects until all cells are connected.

- Step 1: Start from the given entry cell and mark it as visited.
- Step 2: Get a list of unvisited neighbors of the current cell, called frontier.
- Step 3: Randomly choose a new cell from the frontier.
- Step 4: Randomly choose a already visited neighbor of the new cell.
- Step 5: Remove the wall between the new cell and its neighbor (connect the new cell to the visited path).
- Step 6: Marke the new cell as visited and remove it from the frontier.
- Step 7: Add the unvisited neighbors of the new cell to the frontier (the new cell creates new frontier).
- Step 8: Repeat step 3 - 7 until the frontier is empty (all cells are visited and connected)

The Prim's algorithm is chosen because it has a similar logic to DFS, so it is easy for us to discuss and implement them both together.

The mazes generated by Prim's algorithm has many short cul-de-sacs, which is a different aesthetics than mazes created from DFS. This makes the mazes generated by our programe more diverse and interesting.

#### Creating imperfect maze
DFS and Prim's algorithm create perfect mazes.
To generate imperfect mazes, we randonly remove some walls in the perfect mazes.
In this way, the paths are connected in more than one ways and thus creates multiple solutions.

The default setting removes 10% of the walls. This percentage can be changed by passing a float betwenn 0 and 1 to the `make_imperfect()` function in `maze_generator.py`.

The wall removal follows the constraint that the open areas cannot be wider than 2 cells.

### Maze solving algorithm: Breadth-First Search (BFS)
BFS explores the maze level by level (n steps away from the entry cell). The shortest path is found as soon as the exit cell is reached.

- Step 1: Start from he entry cell, mark it as visited, add it to the queue (to be processed), set its parent (previous cell in the path) to be None.
- Step 2: Add unvisited neighbors that are open to the current cell to the queue and set their parents to the current cell.
- Step 3: Remove the current cell from the queue and set the next one as the current cell.
- Step 4: Repeat Step 2 - 3 until the exit cell is found.
- Step 5: Reconstruction the solution from the exit cell using the stored parent information.

BFS is chosen because it has a similar logic to Prim's algorithm, so it is easy for us to implement them together.
BFS is suitable for unweighted graphs, which is the case for our maze.
BFS only need to traverse the graph once to find the shortest path, making it time-efficient.


## Instructions

Install dependencies:

    make install

Run the program:

    make run ARGS="config.txt"
    # or
    python3 a_maze_ing.py config.txt

Run the program in debug mode:

    make debug

Remove temporary files and caches:

    make clean

Code linting using `flake8` and `mypy`

    make lint
    # Or in strict mode
    make lint-strict


### Configuration file format
#### Mandatory keys:
| Key | Description | Example |
|----|-------------|---------|
| WIDTH | Maze width in number of cells | WIDTH=10 |
| HEIGHT | Maze height | HEIGHT=10 |
| ENTRY | Entry coordinates (x,y) | ENTRY=0,0 |
| EXIT | Exit coordinates (x,y) | EXIT=9,9 |
| OUTPUT_FILE | Output filename | OUTPUT_FILE=maze.txt |
| PERFECT | Generate perfect maze or not | PERFERCT=True |

#### Optional keys:
| Key | Description | Example |
|----|-------------|---------|
| SEED | Set random seed for reproducibility | SEED=42 |
| ALGORITHM | Set the algorithm used to generate the maze, DFS or Prim, default DFS | ALGORITHM=DFS |

### Reusable module
The maze generation and solution part of the project is packaged as the `mazegen` reusable module.

#### Installation

    pip install mazegen-1.0.0-py3-none-any.whl

##### Requirements
Python 3.12 or higher

#### Example usage

    from mazegen.config import Config
    from mazegen.maze_generator import MazeGenerator
    from mazegen.solve.maze_solver import MazeSolver

    # Configuration
    config_dict = {
        "WIDTH": "10",
        "HEIGHT": "10",
        "ENTRY": "0,0",
        "EXIT": "9,9",
        "OUTPUT_FILE": "maze.txt",
        "PERFECT": "True",
        "SEED": "42",
        "ALGORITHM": "DFS"
    }
    config = Config(config_dict)

    # Generate maze
    maze = MazeGenerator.generate_maze(config)

    # Find the shortest solution
    solution = MazeSolver(maze).solve_maze()

#### Configurations
- **WIDTH**: Maze width in number of cells
- **HEIGHT**: Maze height
- **ENTRY**: Entry coordinates (x,y)
- **EXIT**: Exit coordinates (x,y)
- **OUTPUT_FILE**: Output filename
- **PERFECT**: Generate perfect maze or not
- **SEED**: Optional, set random seed for reproducibility
- **ALGORITHM**: Optional, set the algorithm used to generate the maze, DFS or Prim, default DFS

#### Maze and solution path representation
The maze is represented as a 2D int array with the first dimension representing the rows and the second dimension representing the columns.

Each int in the array represents a cell and the value of the int represents which walls of the cell are closed.
A cell is an int from 0 to 15, where the last 4 bits represents the walls.
The walls are each represented by 1 bit.
0 means the wall is open, 1 means the wall is closed.
The north wall is the first bit (LSB), the east wall is the second bit, the south wall is the third bit, the west wall is the 4th bit.
For example, 3 (binary 0011) means the cell is open to the south and west.

The solution path is represented as a list of int with each int representing a direction to go starting from the entry point to the exit point.
1 represents going north, 2 represents going east, 4 represents going south, 8 represents going west.


#### Core classes
- `##MazeGenerator`: Main interface for maze generation.
- `Grid`: Representation of a maze with the following attributes:
    - width (int)
    - height (int)
    - entry (tuple[int, int])
    - exit (tuple[int, int])
    - grid (list[list[Cell]]): The grid in the form of a 2D array of `Cell` objects.
    - optionally:
        - seed
        - algo(rithm) (str)
- `Cell`: Representation of a cell in the maze withe the following attributes:
    - pos (tuple[int, int]): Position of the cell in the maze.
    - visited (bool): Whether the cell has been visited or not.
    - walls (int): An interger from 0 to 15 that signifies which walls of the cell are open.
    - is_42 (bool): Whether the cell is part of the 42 pattern.
- `MazeSolver`: Find the shortest solution path from entry to exit using the Breadth-First Search (BFS) algorithm (`solve_maze()`). The solution is represented as a list of int.
- `Config`: Set the configuration of the maze from a dictionary.

#### Package structure

    mazegen/
    ├── algo/                   # Maze generation algorithms
    │   ├── maze_algo_dfs.py    # DFS
    │   ├── maze_algo_prim.py   # Prim's algorithm
    │   └── maze_imperfect.py   # Make a perfect maze imperfect
    ├── config/                 # Maze configuration
    │   └── maze_config.py      # Maze configuration
    ├── grid/                   # Representation of the grid
    │   ├── maze_cell.py        # Representation of a cell
    │   └── maze_grid.py        # Representation of the grid with 42 pattern
    ├── solve/                  # Representation of the solution
    │   └── maze_solver.py      # Find the shortest solution path from entry to exit
    └── maze_generator.py       # Main generator class


### Visualization
This project uses the `curses` module to render the maze on the terminal with the following user interactions:

- Use the arrow keys ← ↑ → ↓ to scroll the curses window.
- Press i to enter input mode.
- Input 1 to regenerate a new maze.
- Input 2 to show or hide the shortest solution path.
- Input 3 to rotate maze colors.
- Input 4 to quit

### Output file format
The output file consists of the following parts:
- the maze printed as a grid, where each cell is represented as a hexadecimal digit,
- the entry coordinates x,y,
- the exit coordinates x,y,
- the shortest solution path as a sequence of directions (N/E/S/W) from the entry to the exit.

## Project management

### Task divisions
- README (both)
- Makefile (lvasconc)
- Read configuration file and check validity (lvasconc)
- Generate maze
	- Grid representation (yanlu)
	- Backtracking algorithm (lvasconc)
	- Prim's algorithm (yanlu)
    - Imperfect maze (yanlu)
- Find shortest path: Breadth First Search (yanlu)
- Write to output file (yanlu)
- Visualization
    - Basic maze display (lvasconc)
    - User interaction (yanlu)
- Create reuable module (yanlu)

### Initial planning and evolution
We initialy planned to use the MLX library. But after discussing with peers, we decided to use the Python build-in `curses` library for a terminal rendering.

### Reflections
Both teammates took their responsibilities and completed their tasks in time. The collaboration worked smoothly.

We could have planned better and have clearer task divisions at the beginning.

## Resources
- [Maze generation algorithm: Recursive backtracking](https://weblog.jamisbuck.org/2010/12/27/maze-generation-recursive-backtracking)
- [Maze generation algorithm: Kruskal's algorithm](https://weblog.jamisbuck.org/2011/1/3/maze-generation-kruskal-s-algorithm)
- [Maze generation algorithm: Prim's algorithm](https://weblog.jamisbuck.org/2011/1/10/maze-generation-prim-s-algorithm.html)
- [Solve maze using Breadth First Search (BFS)Algorithm](https://medium.com/@luthfisauqi17_68455/artificial-intelligence-search-problem-solve-maze-using-breadth-first-search-bfs-algorithm-255139c6e1a3)
- [Breadth-First Search in Python](https://www.datacamp.com/tutorial/breadth-first-search-in-python)
- [Python bitwise operators](https://wiki.python.org/moin/BitwiseOperators)
- [mazelib, a python API for creating and solving mazes](https://github.com/john-science/mazelib)
- [List of Unicode Characters of Category “Other Symbol”](https://www.compart.com/en/unicode/category/So)
- [Python curses module documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/library/curses.html)
- [Python curses module tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLzMcBGfZo4-n2TONAOImWL4sgZsmyMBc8)
- [256 ANSI color codes](https://hexdocs.pm/color_palette/ansi_color_codes.html)
- [Packaging python projects](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects/)
- [Python virtual environment venv](https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_virtualenv.asp)
- [Creating a Python Makefile](https://earthly.dev/blog/python-makefile/)

### Tools used
- **venv**: Create virtual environment
- **git**: Version control and collaboration
- **pip**: Package manager
- **build**: Package builder
- **flake8**: Code linting and style checking
- **mypy**: Static type checker for Python

AI was used to compare different algorithms and explain them step by step with examples.
